
Considerations for changes in ImageMagick Version 7


Expanded from IM discussion forum topic...
ImageMagick version 7 wish list
  http:///magick.imagemagick.org/viewtopic.php?f=2&t=11502

NOTHING presented here has been finalized, or programmed.

This presents an opportunity to make some major non-backward compatible
changes (not to major) that may have been needed for a long time.

During the last Major Revision IM v5 to IM v6 resulted "convert" and most
other IM commands switching to a 'do options in order given' type change. See
IM Examples, "Basics", for details.   This in turn allowed for the
introduction of things like parenthesis, and image sequence re-ordering
operators, as well as the addition of the "-composite" into the convert
command.

With IM version 7 development now a possibility, other similar changes can
also now be looked at and thought about. The following list is what I consider
the most important changes that need to be made, to make IM even better for
everyone.

----------------------

Major Changes....

 * Data structures modified to handle transparency as ALPHA rather than
   MATTE.

   I consider this vital, as just about ever complex function in IM has to
   'negate' matte for correct math color processing. Almost all input and
   output handling of transparency is also generally given in terms of
   alpha values rather than matte values.

   Currently the only operators that deal with 'matte' data in that form is
   -separate, -combine, -threshold, and -level. All other operators I know
   about use 'alpha' values, those operators include -fx and -evaluate.

 * Handling of image 'channels'.

     o Greyscale only has one channel.
     o General create/delete/swap of channels.
     o User defined channels (say holding masks, labels, distance)

     o Use of 'sync' flag to 'syncronize' alpha weighting, and color handling.
       That is 'sync' means treat all channels as a single color unit,
       and not as separate entities. See -auto-level, -morphology convolve,
       and alpha blending in mathematical compositions.

     o Use of a channel for the 'write-mask' (clip mask) for various
       operations.   This includes fixing bugs and other usage problems
       in many operators.

       See my notes (developers only) in
          http://wraith.rcs.griffith.edu.au/~anthony/im/STORE/
             write_masking_operations.txt

     o Make expensive operations avoid calculating results pixels with
       a 'write mask' set.

     o Combine 'write mask' with a virtual-pixel Ignore/Disable so as to
       generate a 'read mask' or 'ignore pixel contribution' mask.
       OR a completely separate 'read mask' channel posibility.

       Specific example: allow the compilation of statistics from just
       a masked area of the using -identify, and histogram generation.

       Also: Perform blurs, distortions, morphology with specific areas,
       and especially virtual pixels, able to be completely ignored, just
       as -resize does normally.

 * Rewrite of "convert" so as to, remove the old 'legacy' handling (giving
   errors if no images are present), and to allow 'single pass', or file
   stream parsing of the image processing operations.

   That means image processing operations could be read from a file, or even
   from a pipeline.  That is no more command line length limits.  It may even
   be posible to have a daemon process to which the calling program (such as
   PHP) submits image processing operations 'on the fly'.

   Imagine for example a shell script that reads images, does calculations
   the feeds operations to a background running imagemagick command!  That
   would completely remove the need for IM to

     o A 'reset' option will be needed that will completely reset the
       command.  That is remove all images, MPC buffers, and return settings
       to defaults.

     o close/exit/quit options to: close the input stream completely,
       stop reading current stream (at least for the moment),
       have image command quite completely (perhaps do final image write)

     o Replace the current 3 sets of CASE statements with better function
       handling method that will speed up the library calls.

     o Use of a 'wand' for passing of image 'attributes', per-image
       'properities', and global 'artifacts' into operators.

   The command will probbaly not be called "convert" perhaps "imagick"?

 * A fully-defined system of argument handling to allow the use of image
   information.  EG: the update to the current system of 'attributes',
   'properities', and 'artifacts'

     o allow use of escapes in geometry arguments.

     o FX access to image information, including user defined numerical
       'properities' and 'artifacts', posibly even evaluate expressions.

        For example precalculate and save statistic information and constants
        into pre-image properties or global artifacts, then call FX which uses
        that pre-calculated numbers so as to avoid recalculating them all the
        time.

        Also saving FX constants in properities, allowing you to do your own
        'tally' of image information as to go.

     o Formatting of "fx" number, and other strings 
       (That is some method of formating percent escapes)

 * Consolidation of color space and color profile handling?
   These are after all really the same thing.

     o Input images are to be 'thought' to be using a "sRGB" profile
       on both read and write, unless the default color profile is specified.
       (-linear flag?)

     o We will need a "sGray" (non-linear) vs a "gray" (linear) colorspace
       for saves to MIFF and to handle conversions between them.

     o ALL linear processing commands such as  resize,  blur,  distort, level,
       draw, morphology, dither etc., should either: automatically convert
       images to a linear RGB colorspace, or produce a warning (image is not
       linear).

       WARNING: automatic conversion may not be a good idea for IM Q8 versions
       popular amongst window, and large image, users.

     o all color settings (-fill, -background, etc) should have a colorspace
       associated (RGB, sRGB, undefined). Note that '#...' colors has
       no defined colorspace and could be any colorspace.

   For more details of all the known colorspace problems to be fixed see
   http://www.imagemagick.org/Usage/bugs/future/#colorpace


Minor Changes and handling (may also be added in IM v6)

  * Ability to handle a variable number of arguments for some options
    (only posible in a one pass system option handling system), to allow for
    optional arguments to different operation 'methods'.

    For example  -noise random  does not need an argument, but
    other noise methods do.

  * Complete removal of many old obsolete options, like -pen,
    Flag many others as depreciated!

  * Text/Image Justification, as separate to Gravity Positioning.
    But undefined justification uses the gravity setting.

    Perhaps Justification can be like gravity, or a specific 'handle' point
    within the image.  EG: +X+Y pin-point inside the image!

  * Image Layout methods such as the paged array provided in "montage" images.
    As a result the "montage" command itself could be simply a "script"
    wrapper around the pipe-lined imagemagick processor.

  * Consolidation of 'auto-level' type options such as -normalize,
    -contrast-stretch, -linear-stretch, -equalize into a single option with
    various methods, to allow for easier expansion with many other automatic
    image leveling and image enhancement techniques and methods. Many of
    these have been 'proven' in scripts developed by Fred Weinhaus.

  * Consolidation of specialised blurs such as "-radial-blur" and
    "-motion-blur" with correct naming of the blur, and directional
    effect selection.  EG:  -blur-special method args

  * Draw by default turns fill on and stroke off, but this is no good for
    drawing lines! This may be why 'fill' is 1/2 pixel too big!  the fill size
    should be fixed so it it only fills to actual boundary, but may need
    'stroke' to draw rectanges to whole pixel boundaries.

  * FX parsing to execution tree.

  * Make histogram: comments 'off' by default, unless specifically enabled.

    Better still remove histogram: and replace with a -histogram (image to
    single row of 'value bins') and -profile (graph a row or column of pixels)
    options instead!  Probably a separate function to return color counts (as
    per "identify" output.

  * Defining of the 'intensity' method to use for things requiring a
    greyscale value from color values.
    Specifically  -compose LightenIntensity, -compose CopyOpacity
    -clut (color to A index color)  and so on.

  * Fine control of settings (context) using \[...\]
    For example
      \( -font arial label:unbold \[ -font arialb \) label:bold \] label:unbold

    That would then imply that -respect-parenthesis is either not needed, or
    simply means that \( ...\) also does a \[ ... \] as part of its handling.

  * ensure -region geometry ... +region  is working
    internally replace with a \( +clone -crop geometry ... \) -compose
    NOTE: any image sequence operator can also terminate -region

  * Limit simple image operations to specific images (reduces clone needs)
      -image-list list ... +image-indexes
    NOTE: a image list operator also terminates -region

  * -fx-image expression    process/replace all images using the expression
    not just the first image (a simple -fx version)

  * Replace -rotate with a call to distort images (VP background, bestfit)
    Merge old Rotation method into -shear with '@' flag,  or as -shear-rotate

  * expert option to change '%' escape to some other character (same rules)

There will probably be many items that would not be compatible with the
current system.

Posibilities and thoughts from the above (IM v8 posibility hooks).

 * As part of this consider the parsing of each option (setting/operation)
   into a data structure to allow for the future addition of repeatable options
   for creating loops, functions and if-then-else control structures.

 * We could even go so far as to allow for the automatic generation of an
   equivelent C program source from convert arguments.  This however depends
   on how the above is implemented.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

IM 7 Suggestions/Thoughts -- from Fred Weinhaus

1) Implement a skip factor for selecting frames

1a) Anthony:  Read one image from a stream of images, without EOF or closing
    stream. Not just ALL images in a stream to EOF.   That is allow for loop
    processing of an image stream!

2) Implement some mechanism to permit compiled-like fx expressions, i.e.
  a way to speed them up.

  By this I mean allow sequencing through the output and indexing into the
  input image(s) according to the expression.

  A simple means of doing this would be a new -process filter template. That
  way, someone like me can code the fx expression operation without having to
  know all the details of IM core programming.

3) Modularize the histogram functions so that operations could be performed
  on/using the cumulative as well as regular and normalized histograms. For
  example, many of my automatic thresholding scripts need to perform some
  math operation such as log on the normalized histogram (probability
  distribution) cumulating arrays from both ends.

4) Perhaps modularize the code in such a way that one can piece together new
  functions without having to know all the internal details of IM core
  operations.

  Anthony has mentioned macro-like programming with loops, etc. This may well
  be what I am after.

  Seems like many more people might be able to contribute to IM functions if
  modules or functions could simply be pieced together.

  This may not be practical as I know little about programming.

  Alternately, more -process templates like I mentioned above could be
  provided so that users could more actively contribute back new functions.

5) Improvements to display to allow control point pair picking and storing
  in a file

6) Improvements to display to allow interactive drawing (lines, circles etc),
  measuring and/or reporting (distances and angles of lines and
  radius/diameter of circles, etc)

7) Ability to generate new images such as contants and gradients from the sizes
  of earlier images in the command line. This would include fx-like
  computations from the width and height in specifying the constant or
  gradient image size.  I think this may already be in Anthony's list.

8) Functions using the histogram, such as -normalize, -equalize,
  -contrast-stretch, (level?) etc should permit at least the first 2, if not
  up to the following 4 ways to operate as relevant: a) process each (rgb)
  channel separately, b) process all (rgb) channels in concert based upon the
  images global stats or, c) access some other user-specified colorspace to
  compute the histogram (or min/max) from the appropriate intensity-like
  channel and apply to the rgb image and d) similar to the latter c) option,
  but convert to the other colorspace, process the intensity like channel
  only, then convert back to rgb.

9) Layer positioning with some sort of gravity control.

9a) Anthony:  And Justification relative to the gravity defined position!

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
